welcome to topcast and to another live
recording this one is on the topic of
seeking truth knowledge and belief and
some of my views about this
just because
there's an aspect of my view on
knowledge that is objected to most
frequently and I wanted to address some
of this or emphasize an aspect of the
way I understand knowledge and its
construction what it is
because I think that in my writings so
far thus far I might not have
highlighted this particular thing
sufficiently I've said it but I haven't
bold-faced underlined italicized this
particular aspect of epistemology
and so I'm going to do that today
I read an article called seeking truth
and that's the one that I'm going to go
through today with some more exposition
seeking truth the article was motivated
in part by Danny Frederick Frederick who
is a philosopher who passed away sadly
just recently uh last year I believe
and he was a great papyrian
but he disputed popper on a few issues
and he wrote a paper years ago called
Truth cannot be our epistemic aim or
truth is not our epistemic aim something
to that effect anyway
and this motivated me to respond to
Danny and you know in a sense
in a sense in the preparing Community
this is splitting hairs
because
what do we mean by The Pursuit Of Truth
when Danny said that truth is not an
epistemic aim he meant that when we're
constructing knowledge constructing
scientific theories for example not
aiming at the final truth
and to that extent I would agree
but
to try and remove truth altogether from
the story would be an error I'm not
saying that Danny made that era or cease
speaking at all for Danny from now on
people should of course look up a person
in their own words so from what I say
from now on don't intend this to think
that I am disagreeing with him
uh even though that's the way I started
this what I mean is this was motivated
by
what I read of Danny and what when we we
engaged on this particular issue the
issues that arose out of this
and so yes I I am on side with the
notion that
in epistemology in knowledge
Construction in science mathematics
anywhere else
the whole aim of the project is not to
find the final truth indeed
like all papillians
I would agree that we can't actually
ever get there because of fallibalism
because of the nature of conjectural
knowledge and the infinite complexity of
reality you can't get to the final truth
my recent way of trying to explain this
is to say that
any statement of final truth would have
to be comprehensive in some way to be
the final truth it would have to not be
deficient to be the final truth not
leave anything out
that's what final truth would mean for
me
but not leaving anything out would mean
having a comprehensive statement of
everything everywhere all the time
an impossible State of Affairs
that's what I mean by final truth others
might say well but can't you have a
narrow kind of final truth
can't you say that two plus three equals
five is a final pristine truth just
there and I would say no
because that contains a lot of
assumptions
what this two means what this plus means
what this three means immediately you're
brought into a world of considering what
arithmetic is all about and how things
are decided in arithmetic what can be
done what the limitations are
I'm not saying that two plus three
equals five is false
or that we should say we cannot know
that two plus three equals five I know
that two plus three equals five you know
that two plus three equals five anyone
can do mathematics no it's a two plus
three equals five
this is a different question too is two
plus three equals five
the ultimate final truth
or an ultimate final truth
and on that I say no
because
well again there's ambiguity David
deutsches pointed this out by the way
equals the equal sign cannot mean
exactly the same as after all two plus
three does not look like
five it doesn't look look like the
number five so we've got a problem there
as well let's not get hooked on this
issue
seeking truth is about a rebuttal of the
traditional idea of knowledge and what
is normally defended as knowledge
in the intellectual community
and
that version of knowledge is what is
known as Justified true belief
and that comes to us
from the ancients from Plato
who wrote in various places about his
view of what he called
epistemic which was knowledge as
compared to doxa
which was a kind of opinion
and say contrasted these things
opinion
strangely enough was possibly closer to
what the papyrian conception of
knowledge is but not exactly
let me not get sidetracked let me get to
the article this is an article that is
now astonishingly for me almost exactly
five years old and so I may have
different ways of phrasing things now
which is why I wanted to go through this
and in particular if we talk about
knowledge as Justified true belief
in the erudite Ivory Tower intellectual
sense
I want to focus today on belief and
that's what I'm going to concentrate on
and the extent to which belief exists
what its role would play in epistemology
and whether indeed we should believe and
believe
which is a bit of a Trope idea
now let me begin reading seeking truth
the search for truth
the prevailing view of knowledge handed
down from Plato is that knowledge is
some kind of Justified true belief
modern incarnations descended with
mutations to filled in each occupied by
this desire for Justified truth include
bayesianism
a more mathematically inclined twin of
inductivism where the idea is that
knowledge is Justified as close to True
by repeated confirming instances
whether Bayesian or inductivists these
kinds of
justificationism applied to science hold
that the more frequently one observes a
hypothesis to work the more confident
one can be in expecting it is actually
true more true or probably true compared
to its rivals
end quote of myself there
so this is the common sense
view in Academia of knowledge
I would not say it's the common sense of
you
in society of knowledge
well though depending upon how people
use language
I hear you know okay let's let's talk
about an every man to some extent
who knows something of philosophy Ricky
Gervais
Ricky Gervais likes to make the point
by emphasizing the word no
when he's talking about God
that
although he does not believe in God
he cannot know if there's a God and no
one can know if there's a God
and so technically speaking he's
agnostic rather than atheists but he
calls himself an atheist
but
agnosticism would be the more
intellectually honest position because
he says no one can know emphasizing no
now this is the Everyman version of no
but you don't know that people will say
the Big Bang
yes you can believe in the Big Bang
because there is this evidence for it
but no one was there at the Big Bang
there's no proof
even though there's evidence that
supports this idea therefore you can't
know the Big Bang happened
so in this case the word no is serving
as a synonym for certain that
you can't be certain that the Big Bang
happens
you can't be absolutely sure without a
doubt the Big Bang happened therefore
you don't know the big thing happened
this is what Ricky Gervais is getting up
with God you can't be absolutely 100
certain you can't rule it out
um so therefore you can't know this is
this destroys what knowledge is if that
is the standard for knowledge no claim
will ever meet it because we're fallible
there can be no standard of proof for
anything ever including in mathematics
of that kind we can't prove things as
true in mathematics all we can do is to
prove something is consistent with
axioms which you assume are true
at best at best
so this is a problem
so this whole first paragraph that I've
read there has a bunch of invocations of
different misconceptions inductivism a
way of justifying theories as more
likely to be true because you've had
repeated observations in the past of a
particular thing therefore you're more
Justified of thinking that thing is true
in the future
or will hold universally
the old
You observe a whites one then another
white swan then another white swan and
you eventually develop the theory which
you're more and more confident in
the more and more white swanses observe
that all swans are wise
that's supposed to be
the process of induction which leads to
this
conclusion that you should be confident
in
that all swans away
okay firstly that's not science of
course as I like to point out here very
often science about explanations not
predictions
and secondly
just as with bayesianism which would say
you can do a mathematical calculation
based upon the number of swans you've
thus far observed
that will put a precise number on how
confident you should be
to the next one your observers want
it means and I'm going to come to this
in the article that
the more
observations you have that are
consistent one with another white Swans
in this case the higher your confidence
becomes such that your confidence is
always at its highest at its maximum
point
the instant before it's refuted by an
observation that does not fit
with your prediction in other words
you can be most highly confident that
all swans are white the moment before
you see a Black Swan because that's the
moment at which you've seen the most
white swans and only white swans
so your your confidence goes from the
highest possible to now the lowest
possible zero not all swans away and
they aren't
okay
so let's keep going
but bayesianism in claiming that some
theory has some quantifiable indeed
calculable and precise amount of Truth
we can discover cannot explain how
despite repeated confirmations
increasing one's confidence in the truth
of a theory nevertheless it can still be
shown utterly false one observation that
the theory cannot accommodate indeed it
cannot explain how it is
that when confidence in truth is at its
highest this is when theories are
typically shown false
so for example every single observation
that occurred prior to around 1919 was a
confirming instance that would have
granted Bayesian credibility
to Newton's theory of gravity
if that date's in dispute we need only
to move it back to around 1859 where
Newton's Theory had never been known to
produce any anomalous predictions it was
in that year that Urban Le verier in
Celestial mechanics published a data
dating from around 1697 to 1842 which
when investigated carefully appeared to
reveal some anomalies with Mercury's
orbit in principle these could
reasonably at the time have been
interpreted as consistent with Newton's
theory on the Assumption the orbit was
being perturbed by some other massive
body this was not unprecedented given
the method of discovery of Neptune
relied on something quite similar
whatever the case absent any other
Theory the Bayesian method of increasing
confidence that a theory is true given
repeated instances that are consistent
with the theory meant that Newton's
theory of gravity was meant that
the confidence in Newton's theory of
gravity was at its highest right before
it was shown false
at which point all of those observations
that it was correct now flowed in some
sense to its replacement
Einstein's general theory of relativity
or if they did not flow then the count
started again and Einstein's general
theory of relativity being without
Rivals just continues to grow and grow
in truth to this day and with each
passing day we should be more confident
not less that it is true
but nothing in bayesianism no matter how
many confirmations there are can rule
out the possibility that Einstein's
general theory will be ruled out by a
process similar to that which Newtons
went through
namely some observation inconsistent
with Einstein's general theory but
consistent with some other theory that
does everything Einstein's does but also
accurately predicting where Einstein's
theory does not work indeed we should
expect it to be shown false because we
should always expect some deeper Theory
to explain everything some currently
accepted best theory does and more
that is we should admit theories are
improvable and progress is always
possible because knowledge continues to
grow in particular we should expect the
theory in physics to be found that is
deeper than both quantum theory and
general relativity one single theory
that can Explain why both work and which
also do something new that neither is
able to perhaps explain dark matter and
dark energy or something like that
something at a deeper level
that is what we should expect we should
expect falsity to be shown and show it
so we should expect that general
relativity is now strictly false we just
don't know how it is and we cannot show
it is yet
one day we will because we will have
both the replacement for it and the
tests to distinguish the replacement
from general relativity by comparing it
against reality in some way we call such
comparisons crucial tests or crucial
experiments
come on
what's up
end quote of me again here um and this
is the idea here
that
everything in science every Theory we
have should be regarded not as the truth
ever but rather as a grand misconception
explanatory
but flawed in some way
often in a way that we don't know yet
we don't yet know how it's false
general relativity has
not been shown
to be flawed in any way yet
quantum theory likewise
the idea that DNA is the molecule that
carries the genetic information that
enables natural selection to occur
but oxygen is required for combustion
that metamorphic rocks form from igneous
or sedimentary rocks all of these
all of these Notions from science
should be regarded as containing
misconception in some way and
will be absorbed by Future theories that
improve upon the existing theories
by showing them to be strictly false but
a strictly false Theory doesn't mean a
useless Theory or a theory that won't
work or anything else like that
what it means is it's just not final
it's not the last word there can be no
last word
and so we're in a a position of forever
having to construct
new knowledge which requires new
conjectures
let's keep going
to remain with bayesianism for a moment
it is also important to note that
Bayesian bayesianism alone can explain
how an ad hoc modification to a theory
is not also verified to the same degree
as explained in the fabric of Reality by
David Deutsch the idea that the
currently accepted theory of gravity is
Justified as true or probably true
because of all the observations that
people have ever made consistent with it
applies also to the theory that the
prevailing theory is Justified as true
or probably true except in cases where
it is defied on those occasions when
objects levitate for reasons not
accounted for by the theory of gravity
the our best theory of gravity is true
except when things levitate is Justified
by precisely all those observations that
justify the current accepted theory of
gravity
okay end quote this is an important
thing to notice
that if you think that justification is
a thing
then note that
variations of your theory
will also be justified by precisely the
same observations
as long as the variation doesn't
contradict your theory
so you know
general relativity is the theory of
gravity
but
if you just add to that the extra
assumption the general relativity works
everywhere
except on those few occasions where
there exists anti-gravity
well
then you have a situation where you've
also got a theory that is justified by
all those observations that justify
general relativity
so justification is not a thing
you can't justify something as true
anyway
to say something is Justified as to say
that it is
it is thought to be true shown to be
true in some way
and again there is no such method
as I go on to say so it cannot be the
case that theories are justified by
repeated observations no matter how many
there are if they were the ad hoc
modification that things sometimes also
levitate would also be justified even if
we have never yet witnessed such
levitation that would be inconsistent
with the first Theory that the best
theory of gravity always applies
everywhere
this is an argument against induction
and against bayesianism repeated
observations are not needed
that is not how knowledge is produced
instead theories are guests or
conjectured and then attempts are made
to refute those theories
this is the rare best case scenario
that there are multiple competing
theories
all these theories then get tested
against Reality by some means
the means the method of criticism
along with the subject matter itself are
what Define a discipline or subject area
or domain of inquiry or any other such
synonym for Fields like science as
compared to mathematics and philosophy
or history and morality and so on
so let's recap all of this in light of
the broad brush Strokes that the
majority of people interested in this
topic of epistemology no matter where
they are on the spectrum between
Justified true belief and bayesianism
happen to be
knowledge they sometimes argue is some
kind of belief
so not all bayesians do this some think
knowledge need not be about personal
thoughts
but
I say belief cannot be a property needed
for knowledge as Karl Popper observed in
day for Deutsch has clarified in many
places
David Deutsch doesn't talk about belief
it's not part of his view of knowledge
and one reason is
that's like I want to say is that
knowledge is not only something that is
in Minds
it is also in objects a telescope
contains the knowledge of how to focus
lives a jet engine contains the
knowledge of how to convert chemical
energy into heat and thrust and motion
the DNA molecule contains knowledge of
how to construct an organism
a book contains knowledge as does a
computer but none of these dumb
unthinking objects have
beliefs
so knowledge is not about belief
let me just Linger on that for a moment
foreign
has to be represented somewhere
what you think about the knowledge
doesn't change its representation inside
of your own head
your brain contains representations of
the things you know
the way in which you get to work
whether or not there is milk in the
fridge
scientific theories about acids and
bases all of this knowledge is in your
head there represented in some way
it doesn't matter what it is that you
think about the world that constitutes
knowledge of a kind
I know the lights are on in this room
I know that there is a street outside of
my room here I know that
it's now coming up to ten past six
these are things I know and so therefore
that knowledge is represented here in my
brain somewhere
in my mind
but it it definitely representing the
brain physically in some way physically
instantiated there it doesn't count as
knowledge unless it is physically
instantiated somewhere okay why am I
harping on about this
because now let's contrast that to
belief
we just said that you know
non-human things can contain knowledge
but I don't believe anything
so can people believe things okay well
if belief is to be different to
knowledge then the belief has to be
represented in the brain somehow
physically instantiated there somehow
is it going to be represented
differently
is there a categorical difference
between the way in which belief is
represented as compared to knowledge
I say no
these two things are
there's not another kind of way of
representing stuff in the brain that
deserves to be called belief as compared
to knowledge
what people tend to mean
when they say they believe something is
one of two rather inconsistent things
on the one hand
they use the word belief
to say I believe something
I really believe that
to indicate a higher degree of certainty
to say that of this thing which counts
as knowledge for them they're also
especially certain so when it comes to
God
they don't just know God exists they
believe it they're committed
to that idea
True Believers True Believers
so that's one issue on the other hand
people use belief for when their
confidence is low in something
I don't know but I believe it's going to
rain today
that kind of thing
so this is a contradictory view of what
this thing belief happens to be
when you say you believe something it
depends upon the context
but whatever the case whatever the case
is
it doesn't give the knowledge claim any
special status in terms of the way in
which it's represented I don't think
there is a separate special category of
things by the way everything I'm saying
now is inspired by David Deutsch
there's David Deutsch that came up with
this
so
we have this one thing knowledge
knowledge can be false and I'm going to
come to that
we've just said that knowledge need not
be justified
and knowledge need not be believed to be
knowledge but even if you did believe it
if you said I believe this to be true
that doesn't give it any special status
it's still a conjecture about the world
whatever you think about it whether you
think it's true or not
but as people of reason we shouldn't
think anything is literally the final
truth
rather we can say it can contain truth
and what contained truth means is that
it says something about the world that
is correct that is accurate we're
getting into circularity because then
people will say what do you really mean
by true what do you mean by accurate
these things were just mutually Define
each other
there is a reality out there and insofar
as our knowledge tracks that reality
it's saying something true about that
reality and we can test that to see if
our claims work in reality
and if it survives the test against
reality it must be saying something true
although we might not know what exactly
we might not know exactly what the thing
is that's true
okay
so I say that
one need not believe things in order for
one to know things
books contain knowledge but they don't
contain beliefs
DNA contains knowledge about how to
construct organisms
but it doesn't cause anybody believes
and a telescope contains knowledge about
how to focus and collect light
but it doesn't believe anything
until I go on to say so knowledge is not
about belief must it nevertheless be
justified true Justified true means
shown to be true but we have just seen
that there is no method whereby a theory
can ever be shown to be finally once and
for all true there is always some way it
might be shown false
and we cannot rule that out
this is true in science but even in
mathematics and is basically the
philosophy of fallibalism the claim that
error is impossible to avoid
mathematicians make mistakes and this is
poorly understood but absolutely crucial
to appreciate proofs in mathematics are
computations
proofs are done by something they're
done by a mathematician or a computer
using some physical object their brain
or pen and paper or a calculator
and physical objects obey the laws of
physics and if the laws of physics say
that necessarily
physical processes are error-prone in
other words
cannot be shown 100 percent
to produce the same outcome every time
this is a consequence of the laws of
quantum theory which is the deepest
physical Theory we have
then methods of proof will also likewise
not be in a hundred percent in all cases
everywhere all the time absolutely
perfect error can creep in and you never
know
if an error has crept in it
so it remains always conjectural you're
fallible and so
anything you write down including a
proof which is a computation could
contain an error that no one has
detected yet
more than that for reasons stated above
about bayesianism we cannot even put a
close to 100 number on
any claim
or any probability of it being true or
close to true
now my favorite example here remains
Euclid's demonstration of the obvious
clear to everyone fact that through any
two pointy unique straight line can be
drawn
we now know this to be false because
there exists such things as curved or
non-looking non-euclidean geometries and
these in many cases
show that many straight lines can be
drawn through any two points
and I mentioned this in the naval
podcast among other places
so that deals with
that deals with certainty I suppose
what about Justified
well knowledge is likewise never
Justified because if it could be then
the justifications would have to be
justified after all you're not going to
be justified if the things you're using
to justify something are themselves
unjustified
as I say if they could not be then our
original claim would not be justified as
true but if the justifications for the
justifications were true on this view
then this would only be because they
were Justified and so on leading to an
infinite regress
so justification cannot work as some
type some kind of deep truth about how
knowledge works because it rests either
on an infinite regress
of needing to justify your
justifications or stopping at some point
where the justifications are unjustified
meaning that justificationism is no kind
of deep and universal truth about
knowledge
you might stop somewhere like axioms and
just say the axioms are true how do you
know they're true you might say they're
self-evidently true this is what
Descartes would say and others would say
self-evidently true
evident to you maybe not evident to me
that introduces subjectivity into this
whole thing
as I say
finally consider true
when people hear
use true
when you're talking about Justified true
belief as a definition of knowledge
they seem to mean certain certain truth
but we cannot be certain because we can
never be without doubt and besides
certainty is just a feeling
one feels certain or not and objective
knowledge cannot be about one's
subjective feelings so there we have it
for the moment
knowledge is not justified and it is not
true and it is not about belief
everything about Plato's definition is
your own instead
what is the case is that knowledge is
about guessing theories that solve some
problem we have and then criticizing
those theories if we're fortunate
because we've been sufficiently creative
and critical and perhaps have cooperated
with other similarly creatively critical
people
we managed to have many such theories
and then the critical process of
experimenting in science or disproving
in mathematics or trying just to argue
in all areas and reveal weaknesses and
flaws and contradictions we Whittle away
all the theories that fail to meet our
criticisms and again if we are fortunate
we're left with just one Theory standing
if we are not left with only one then in
science this is where we can do a
crucial experiment the experiment where
the outcome is predicted to be one way
given one Theory but another way given
the other Theory and that allows us to
decide which of them is best explained
as being false
whatever the case and in whatever the
domain usually we're left with
identically one theory that does what we
want it to do to solve our problem and
that's what we call the explanation
so
I say that we can jettison
Justified and belief
entirely from this conception of
knowledge but what about truth
is knowledge nonetheless a Quest For
Truth as papa says
above I seem to be avoiding the word or
it's negation more than once of course
we have seen the Quest for knowledge
cannot be a quest for certainty which is
100 infallible truth but can it be a
quest for something lesser
well for the same reason that it cannot
be a quest for 100 truth it can't be a
quest for 99.99 truth or 99 truth or 50
truth
now
I won't read the rest but what I will go
on to say is as I've already hinted at
knowledge in science
must be about reality and claims about
reality will contain some truth insofar
as they're accurate insofar as they work
insofar as they encounter
um
reality in some way
which leads to the idea of well what's
my definition of knowledge
remember I'm papyrian I don't give
definitions it's the wrong question to
ask
knowledge is explained as
that entity which
once instantiated in a physical
substrate tends to cause itself to
remain so
that's one way of looking at things
knowledge is that information which
tends to get itself copied knowledge is
that information which solves your
problem
now solving your problem might actually
not
mean that it's saying something true
about reality
out there objectively but I might be
saying something true about your
subjective experience of the world
so these are ways of viewing knowledge
but
someone just asked me say the whole
point of
this way of viewing philosophy is to
cleave to explanations to try and
understand the world
to try and solve particular problems the
problem I'm trying to solve here is
salvaging the notion of knowledge
from subjectivity from saying that well
people's opinions just aren't what they
are
you can be more or less certain about
things you can feel like you're
Justified because ultimately
being justified feeling justified comes
down to a sense that you're Justified
but I want to take it away from that and
that's the belief again that's inside of
a person's mind this is subjective we're
taking it out of them we're saying does
the claim objectively solve a problem in
the world
then it counts as knowledge
if you regard that information as being
useful that's knowledge
the best way of thinking about this
is Newton's theory of gravity
I know Newton's theory of gravity
any physics student knows Newton's
theory of gravity
if you want to get to the moon
you can navigate using Newton's theory
of gravity it will work
but Newton's theory of gravity
namely the notion that
gravity is a force
that
reaches instantly between two bodies
the Earth and the moon react instantly
to each other on Newtonian gravity
it's a force
it varies as the inverse Square
all of these kind of things
it's not the curvature of space-time
which is not a force
this theory is not true
you're not justified in thinking it true
indeed It Is refuted by any number of
experiments it has been shown to be
false
and because it's not true
and it's not justified no one should
believe it no one should think it's true
it's not justified it's not true and
it's not to be believed
strike three
but it counts as knowledge it counts as
knowledge it is knowledge I know it it
works to solve certain problems not all
problems but it works to solve some
problems it's useful information it
continues to get copied over and again
it's resilient in Chiara my Letter's
terminology
this is what knowledge is
is this a definition of knowledge no
none of these things are definitive
I can imagine improving over time
my understanding of knowledge
to incorporate something else
so these are not definitions and for the
same reason
defining truth is the wrong question
all you can do
if you want a definition is to look up a
dictionary and all definitions
end in either
an infinite regress
or
just an assertion about the world
circularity
I can say what true means is an accurate
statement about the world
well then you reasonable to ask me what
does accurate mean they would say well
what accurate means is something is true
it's circular
what more can you hope for from a
definition
properly considered as David Deutsch
points out
true and false
truth and falsity are properties of
propositions not statements
the business of pure logic and
Mathematics is to
figure out the rules
for how you prove propositions
follow one from another
and so you use P to stand in for the
proposition the proposition P or the
proposition X these are variables that
stand in for statements what we have
with our explanations our statements
statements are approximations to
propositions at best
so we
we don't talk about knowledge as being
true
it's the wrong question we can talk
about knowledge as being shown false
failing unable to
meet the criteria of accurately
describing the world or being true after
all if it was to accurately describe the
world and be true it would always and
everywhere be consistent
with the world
but we don't think that anything will
always and forever remain consistent
with the world that even if something
hitherto has been always consistent with
its predictions about the world that is
no reason to think that tomorrow it will
remain so
we should expect it to be shown false
ultimately all of our claims about the
world are explanations our statements
contain within them some deficiency some
flaw
some Avenue where we're going to in the
case of Science experimentally Show how
they can be falsified
Okay so
that's in particular belief and Truth
we shouldn't believe our knowledge
claims instead we regard something as
knowledge insofar as it solves our
problem and because it solves our
problem we find it useful
and because it's useful information it
tends to get copied and because it tends
to get copied it remains in society and
civilization
instantiated in physical substrates
that makes it resilient information the
thing that survives and ultimately
knowledge will be the thing that
survives longer than
any other entity in the entire universe
except space and time itself perhaps
it will be the most resilient structure
in the universe knowledge
it will Outlast rocks and planets and
stars
all of which are governed by
physical forces the only thing that will
make them last any longer than what the
physical laws
dictate that they should is knowledge
which makes knowledge the most powerful
entity in the universe as well
explanatory knowledge that is
I have some questions in the live chat
so I will go to those now
um
what would I say to someone who says
World War III is inevitable or we are
very close to one I would say they're
engaged in Prophecy they cannot know
that it's inevitable they're making
claims about
knowledge yet to be created
let's say you're a real pessimist on the
Russia Ukraine issue and you think
that's about to turn into
a hot nuclear war
well
you can think that
but you cannot know
what Putin or zelinski will do tomorrow
or Biden or anyone else
you can't the most difficult to predict
entities in the universe are people
difficult to predict individual people
on mass sometimes you can make some
claims about what people on mass will do
but any one individual is highly
unpredictable so inevitable no very
close to one no I think the opposite
I I am an optimist in all senses but
also I think that
even your uh
Russian and Chinese dictators
they know what their people want their
people want peace security wealth and
trade
there can be all sorts of political
reasons to be bellicose diplomatically
for
reasons of their local constituencies to
appear as a strong man to try and
maintain their power but actually
engaging in a hot wall the worst
possible thing that could happen for
China and Russia would be to do
something like that
firstly that would be defeated roundly
and secondly
in this information age
they know that a sizable proportion of
their populations would have access to
the internet and understand that their
governments are being the aggressors
so I have every confidence that
citizens want
robust trade and friendly relations with
their neighbors
just as people in the western
and this is becoming more and more a
thing
um
societies are becoming less and less
violent less and less tolerant of things
like War so I'm optimistic about that
um do I
have a list or video of my favorite book
recommendations beside Deutsch anywhere
online no I I guess I should put
something up there of my favorite stuff
um you know what I've been talking about
recently and I need to maybe do more of
is
um here's a book by Daniel Hannan that's
called inventing Freedom so I've got a
few books on the enlightenment
um that I've read recently that I think
are great it's one that I'm part way
through and I'm sort of devoting some
podcasts to that Paul Davies book what's
eating the Universe I could put down a
list of Paul Debbie's book basically all
of his stuff
um well worth reading as well
um
but yeah I tend to read Popular Science
and philosophy and history books
um I read esoteric Korean history books
about things like the Imaging War the
first Invasion by Japan of Korea yeah
so a lot of what I read is
nothing to do with you know top cast or
with what I've sort of put out there
um
interestingly just on another issue to
do with um Korea it was and and the war
so I can link these two things together
there was a news story recently about
how
ranking all of the countries in the
world in terms of birth rate
South Korea now has the lowest birth
rate on the planet iOS thought it was
well it was until recently I think Japan
but now it's South Korea
I don't know if the article went into
the reasons why
but here I'll give mine
both rates are going down everywhere in
the world of course
even in the West
there can be many reasons for this and
people put forward things like economic
considerations
young people of childbearing age
can't afford houses as their parents did
cost of living
as a proportion of a wage is higher
although we've all got much
better staff
life is actually better
what young people are concerned about is
balancing you know a two income family
where they're not at home by providing
all of the modern benefits of a modern
society to their children
while working
parents today rightly want to give their
children an even better childhood than
what they had they're worried they can't
and so they delay having children until
they think they're in a position they
can they wait too long
they can only have one child or two
child two children something like that
and so certainly birth rates have gone
down from what were they used to be like
you'd have you know ten eight six kids
in a family was not unknown even just a
few decades ago this was commonplace and
now we're down to
two or less
in families and so overall there's a
decline in population
so economics is one reason that is often
cited
here's my throwaway Theory
pessimism and doomerism
in the case of
many people who were born in the
70s and 80s
they grew up very much under the shadow
of the Cold War that was coming to an
end but certainly there was a lot of
dumerism then about nuclear war okay
certainly in the
60s 70s 80s
so birth rates declined then because hey
weren't you thinking maybe the whole
world would end in a
nucleophile who wants to bring a child
into the world where that's the case
once the Cold War ended
climate change became the big thing so
now you know you actually hear people
say this who wants to bring children
into a world that is condemned where
ocean levels are going to rise and it's
just going to be a a hot hell hole why
would you want to bring children into
that
so I understand you know the constantly
fed messages of pessimism
now
in the case of South Korea
people are being kicked in three ways
one the Cold War effectively never ended
in South Korea North Korea is
Siri
um
North Korea is a constant threat and the
South grounds are constantly told that
North Korea is a threat
young men have to go there's
conscription there you know men have to
serve the national service
um
this feeling of you know if you're
living in Seoul the capital of South
Korea very close to the North Korean
border you constantly must you're fed
this notion that the missiles are about
to start flying I've been there a number
of times it's a very it's a very real
threat now although the South Koreans
themselves you know you talk to people
there
they don't talk about it
they seem to ignore it
but they can't ignore it that's there
deep in the the culture and the
social fabric
not far away is a
place where a a dictator is ruling
a place that has been propagandized with
the evil about the evils of the West
so you can imagine the psychological
effect that has on people wanting to
start a family now add to that South
Korea not only you know the Cold War
never end for them but they have all the
dumerism that the rest of the West has
about climate change
and all of the economic difficulties as
well of modern Western Civilization or
the perceived perceived economic
difficulties
okay I had a fourth thing South Korea
has this culture of Highly coercive
education
and so if you go through that
you're not going to want to bring a
child into that I imagine
unless you leave the country in many
South South Koreans of course do
go elsewhere then maybe it'll be
interesting to see
their birth rate probably increases
for expats for people who've emigrated
away but yeah I think that that was my
diagnosis of why South Korea now has the
lowest birth rate in the world which is
really sad
because it's such a dynamic place
um
but yeah a place where
the Cold War never ended and you've got
all the disadvantages of
um the pessimism of
the modern
the modern West
how do I Define truth well we went
through that what's my take on Israel
I believe Papa's stance was very
critical of it while Deutsche is very
defensive of Israel I don't know what
Papa's stance was
I think that
well it's the sole democracy
in that region it's tiny place
but a powerful Place dynamic
it is
the enlightenment instantiated in that
area
I don't know what you know the stance is
well
at the
conclusion of World War II
they needed to be a place and many were
suggested
this
nation was
already I you know all you have to do is
to go to you know obviously the the
um
the history of Judaism to find that
that is where the Jews were long before
Christianity was a thing Islam was a
thing
the Jews were always there and so
therefore it is the natural home
of the Jewish people
so there's that
the Jewish people have been there for
the longest time it is a tiny place
they've continued to make concessions to
people who would do them harm
over their history they've been attacked
and won Wars
they've given away vast tracts of land
and so yeah it is The Shining Beacon of
peace
and I should say tolerance as well
it has all
the modern
um you know
why is the viewing
the social contract
it's the only place in that region where
you for example could be homosexual or
trans that's what people are worried
about now that's a big issue
is the only place
Muslims are welcome there Christians are
welcome there it is a diverse
Multicultural Society Israel
it's wealthy and Powerful because the
people
work hard to try and make
their own nation and the world a better
place
um
Deutsche is very defensive Israel well
David Deutsche was born
in Tel Aviv as far as I know
and they can check Wikipedia for that
um
it's interesting people say defensive I
mean defensive I don't think so I think
just a supporter of the nation that
you're connected to am I defensive of
Australia I don't know
um but something I think they're a great
virtues to Australia so if anyone asks
me
when a particular country is singled out
let's admit it Israel is singled out on
the world stage and held to a standard
that no other country is if it was the
case as many people have pointed out
that Mexico was constantly lobbing
um Rockets into
Texas
no one would blame the United States
for defending itself but
Israel defends itself and it gets in
trouble for doing so it's held to a
different standard it's held to a
different standard because
Jewish people are held to a different
standard Jewish people are held to a
different standard because of this thing
called anti-Semitism anti-Semitism is a
thing because of what David Deutsch
has explained it's known as the pattern
the pattern is this recurrent cycle of
pogroms and violence and discrimination
against the Jewish people that has no
analog in any other kind of
discrimination
it is a
cycle of violence and discrimination
against a particular group of people
that is not like other kinds of racism
which tend to Peter out over time
diminish and disappear almost entirely
but not with anti-Semitism there is a
pattern
of anti-Semitism that stretches
throughout the history of the Jewish
people
sometimes it's at a low ebb and
sometimes it comes back
as strong as ever
resulting in genocides and attacks
obviously
the rise of the Nazis in Germany
was among the worst but it wasn't the
only it's just the most famous
presently we are occupying a time when
especially
on the left but also on the right but
especially on the left anti-Semitism
rears its head again
disguised as
anti-zionism anti-israeli sentiment
that's the way it's disguised because
it's it's not polite it's in politic to
say you hate the Jews
it's impolite to say that
it's not socially acceptable say that so
you say you disagree with the policies
of Israel all the while saying
I'm not an anti-semite it's not the same
being an anti-zionist is not the same as
being an anti-semite
but this is the way the pattern works it
finds new ways to attack
Jewish people
by morphing into subtly different
versions of itself and it is a
right now is particularly terrible it's
always terrible but it's particularly
terrible now because
it's Arisen again in especially Europe
the very and especially
certain countries in Europe are critical
of
Israel
the United Nations makes more
passes more
kind of you know condemns Israel more
often than it condemns anywhere else on
the planet for Its Behavior so yeah
that's what I think about that
uh someone has said I saw your Tweet
about epistemic humility yesterday would
you please explain expand upon that now
I perhaps tweet too often and say now I
can't remember what was my tweet on
epistemic humility let me have a look
I'll scroll back through my tweets
to try and find something
um
[Music]
a lot of tweets are worth talking about
at the moment I mean
Sabine hosenfelder
um
the physicists remarked
well let me read one
in her thread
the last one is the best one it says
everything that needs to be said about
this she said quote
postulating the existence of something
that one can't observe is useless to
describe what we do observe it really
isn't so difficult I find it amazing
that there are actually physicists who
disagree with that end quote
so that's Sabine hossenfelder
on the process of observation and
knowledge and science
I repeat she said
postulating the existence of something
that one can't observe is useless to
describe what we do observe end quote
here's my view
almost everything in science that we
observe has explained in terms of
something we can't observe
she's categorically completely wrong
it's a perfect statement of
utter falsity this is not what science
is about you know my own sort of
examples on this were
I said now do planets in very distant
galaxies dinosaurs not fossils the Big
Bang population three stars so far and
individual Fusion reactions in the Sun
all of these things technically speaking
are not observed
you don't observe planets in very
distant galaxies you can't our
telescopes cannot resolve Stars let
alone planets in very distant galaxies
we can barely resolve planets around
Stars near our own solar system
we certainly can't resolve them we can't
see planets orbiting stars on the other
side of our galaxy
forget about it in other galaxies for
now
but
we explain
the existence of exoplanets planets
beyond the solar system
in other galaxies we can say we can say
categorically we know there are planets
there no in the papyrian sense if you
want Justified true belief then no we
don't know
but one wants to say to Sabine
look I don't observe
planets
in other galaxies you can't our
technology is inadequate to the task
but what we do observe are the galaxies
they can be explained by the unobserved
namely even the Stars we don't even see
the stars in those other galaxies but
they the only way to explain the
existence of those galaxies shining is
that there are stars in them there must
be stars in those galaxies
but you don't see the individual Stars
and the mass of those galaxies is in
part encapsulated by the planets that
are in them you don't see them
we don't see dinosaurs David Deutsch
makes this point you don't see dinosaurs
Sabine you don't see dinosaurs you don't
observe them
they're unobserved
but you explain fossils which are
observed
by dinosaurs that are unobserved so
completely wrong
the Big Bang is the same you know I
pointed this out that you've got various
lines of evidence that you observe You
observe a thing called The Cosmic
microwave background you detect heat
leftover this detection is an
observation
you detect how much hydrogen helium is
out there with spectroscopes in
Intergalactic space that's an
observation
you detect the redshift of galaxies
the Hubble redshift of these galaxies
you detect The Dark Knight Sky You
observe these are observations
you don't observe the Big Bang the Big
Bang is unobserved it's a thing that
happens 13.7 billion years ago no one
was there no one's going to observe it
you can't observe it you can't see
through the CMB by the way there's
Cosmic micro background to the Big Bang
so yeah completely wrong anyway let me
go through
um
looking for epistemic humility
I'm afraid I
I can't
you might have to if you're still there
if you're still listening to me a basic
is your name
um about epistemic humility you may have
to point me to it I oh I'm sorry I've
found it this is back on
March 19th so okay we're going back to a
couple days epistemic humility is
rational critical fallibalism
but mostly don't
but most don't deeply understand
fallibleism ah okay yes so what I was
talking about there this was motivated
by I've been listening to very slowly
um Lex Friedman and Sam Harris talk
four and a half hours
um
if nothing else their bladder control is
one of the greatest in all of podcasting
um
but a number of times throughout the
podcast I mentioned epistemic humility
it is a
catchphrase these days that appears in
number of places I've heard people
should have epistemic humility
and what they mean is that what they
actually mean is of course that we
should
admit that we're not absolutely certain
about stuff
and this should always be the stance and
it is the fundamental stance of anyone
who's a fallibilist
never mind on
issues like the controversial like
um anything to do with covert the
origins of covert
the cost benefit analysis of taking
certain vaccines or a number of vaccines
how many boosters one should have this
kind of thing
we should have epistemic humility there
but we should have epistemic humility
everywhere the proper stance is
fallibleism which doesn't mean
relativism and it doesn't mean dogmatism
it is precisely the opposite to both of
those it just says
you can't have the truth but you also
don't deny
that truth exists
you accept what you have a good
explanations
you're fallible
so does everyone else
but we can know stuff
that's epistemic humility
it's just to say that it's possible to
have knowledge and good explanations
but none of those should make you go
around saying that you know things for
sure
yeah and so yeah
my point with hypothermic humility is
just to say whatever you hear that
whenever you hear this phrase epidemic
humility you hear that way more often
than rational critical you know sort of
stuff out the language I tend to use
about fallibleism it's possible to be
wrong
you're fallible
but most people don't understand
fallibleism is my point if they if they
took the time to read Deutsch and to
read Papa and to understand fallibleism
David's got some wonderful at least one
wonderful article out there all about
foundabilism
and there is a closer to truth
um
interview with him I think which touches
on fallibalism in particular
if people understood this his views on
that
then you know this would be
this would more deeply inform this
notion of so-called epistemic humility
which is a superficial appreciation of
well you shouldn't be dogmatic yeah but
why let's go let's go deeper still than
than that okay
um
guts Hanson has asked hello Brent I'm
curious if you have any thoughts on how
to think about the subject matter of
Psychology from a deutscheon worldview
yes
um so we've talked about this a lot
first thing I'll say is deutschian's not
a word
there is no deutschian
there is
um
the philosophy of critical rationalism
and the worldview expressed in David
Deutsch's books but this doesn't make a
deutscheon they're they're there's a
factual objective claims not to do with
any particular person or the subjective
contents of David's mind they're facts
about the world and explanations so that
said
a good person to follow on
the subject matter of psychology I
believe is lulitanit and Lily did some
wonderful talks years ago about
what psychology
should be and
and she's right what psychology should
be and what we think on this side of the
Ledger
who endorsed the contents at the
beginning Infinity
is that Minds contain memes behavior is
caused by what you know about the world
and in a large part of what you know
about the world the memes that you carry
around with you some explicit some
explicit means you can articulate them
in language and inexplicit means you
can't and sometimes you're unaware of
them
so the memes are the whole story about
what's happening inside of Minds
directing people's behavior and so that
is the proper domain of psychology
psychology is that psychology is the
study of Minds
now when you go off or counseling or
something cognitive behavior therapy
when it's done right
they're trying to get you to
make explicit the inexplicit at times
what you don't know that you know
what you don't know you're thinking what
you don't realize is directing your
behavior the thoughts that are directing
your behavior the memes that are
actually there now psychologists might
not use those words right mean but
that's that's what's going on
we're trying to understand your thoughts
and so
psychology should be about that rather
than you know as it often is in academic
circles this focus on what I've already
said is
beliefs and
biases and that kind of thing
that can be a misdirection okay uh
and so that's what I think about
psychology it also means by the way that
it means that psychology doesn't have to
make
testable predictions in the same way
that
physics does
the the purpose of psychology can be
just about you know the important kind
of psychology I would say is you know if
you want to come to understand your own
mind or if you're having difficulties
and you go to a psychologist
it's not about
doing tests you know they're doing
experimental tests
it's about coming to an understanding an
explanation of the explanations you're
carrying around the explanation of the
memes you have that are directing your
behavior
and that's the proper domain of
psychology
again rather than
doing these
non-explanatory experiments collecting
lots of data about populations of people
and the extent to which listening to
classical music might improve your
memory that kind of stuff without an
explanation without saying how any of
this stuff happens or works
to that extent until we have good
explanations there's no point there's
not much Point doing experiments in
Psychology if you're not testing good
explanations
to what extent do they have good
explanations why collect lots and lots
of data and do statistical analysis when
you don't have good explanations this
leads to
the replication crisis that is separate
to the replication replication crisis in
Psychology well known this idea that
they repeat the experiment they get a
different outcome but never mind the
fact that they can't repeat the
experiment and get the same outcome
never mind the replication crisis why
are they doing experiments in the first
place
the whole point of doing an experiment
is to test a good explanation what's the
good explanation
well if you accept that psychology is
actually about memes
then you can talk about memes and how
memes are replicated
and what effect the inexplicit can have
on the explicit what effect
anti-rational means can have on your
capacity to be rational and to do what
you want and Achieve what you want if
you're carrying around anti-rational
memes in other words
ideas about why you shouldn't be
critical
of certain things that you do and you
might not be aware of what those are
that's why you need a psychologist let's
say or a psychiatrist
then you will be stuck and Lily talks
about this
and you get stuck unable to make
progress
and this is what the true enemy of
reason is
but look up Lily Tanner for
stuff on psychology
and last of all Christoph T do you
believe the universe is infinitely large
what evidence is there for or against uh
so do I believe
[Laughter]
I don't believe anything like seriously
that's a actual claim I don't believe
anything I don't think belief is part of
or should be part of epistemology I
think it's the wrong word
what I know is that we don't know
we have competing theories and I don't
see any reason to cleave to one or the
other at the moment it could be the case
that
spatially
the universe just goes on forever
I've seen some theories of that in
cosmology
it just is the case that you know you
have this infinite universe
um
but you know on the other hand the
universe had a beginning in time
you know that
the fact of the night sky is dark
could be evidence
in favor of it being fine art inside
certainly observable universe though
because an infinite universe that has
been around forever
would have a sky that wherever you
looked there would be a Galaxy or a star
along that line of sign and so the sky
would be bright
that's not the case the sky is dark at
night therefore there's not a star
everywhere you look there's not light
coming from every single place where you
look
but that that more you know puts a
boundary on in time of the the universe
as for space well yeah we don't know I
don't have a belief on the matter
um okay I think that that's it we've
gone for an hour and 15 minutes today
that was a lot of fun that one I didn't
get through my entire article on seeking
truth but hopefully I made the point
that I regard
knowledge as not justified true belief
in fact
it does not need to be justified it does
not need to be true and does not need to
be believed and the perfect
encapsulation of this is Newton's theory
of gravity which I count as knowledge
and many people count as knowledge it
solves a problem it continues to get
copied it's useful information it's
resilient I expect it to last for many
centuries more as a useful guide to
the way in which gravity behaves and it
can be used to make predictions
technically not perfectly accurate but
accurate enough within bounds it counts
as knowledge but you're not justified in
thinking it true and you certainly
shouldn't believe it so therefore
Justified true belief is not the right
way of viewing knowledge I don't have a
definition of knowledge I've given you
my explanation of knowledge
until next time
um when I really should get back to
doing regular uh episodes of top cast
because I'm in the process of editing
for you
but until then
um bye-bye